TPO 4 Lecture 3 Geology

Narrator
Listen to part of a lecture in a geology class.

Professor
Now we¡¯ve got a few minutes before we leave for today. So I¡¯ll just touch on an
interesting subject that I think makes an important point. We¡¯ve been covering
rocks and different types of rocks for the last several weeks. But next week we
are going to do something a bit different. And to get started I thought I¡¯d
mention something that shows how uh¡­as a geologist, you need to know
about more than just rocks and the structure of solid matter, moving rocks, you
may have heard about them.
It¡¯s quite a mystery. Death valley is this desert plane, a dry lake bed in
California surrounded by mountains and on the desert floor these huge rocks,
some of them hundreds of pounds. And they move. They leave long trails
behind them, tracks you might say as they move from one point to another. But
nobody has been able to figure out how they are moving because no one has
ever seen it happen.
Now there are a lot of theories, but all we know for sure is that people aren¡¯t¡¯
moving the rocks. There are no footprints, no tyre tracks and no heavy
machinery like a bulldozer¡­uh, nothing was ever brought in to move these
heavy rocks.
So what¡¯s going on? Theory NO.1 ---Wind? Some researchers think powerful
uh¡­windstorms might move the rocks. Most of the rocks move in the same
direction as the dominant wind pattern from southwest to northeast. But some,
and this is interesting, move straight west while some zigzag or even move in
large circles.
Um¡­How can that be? How about wind combined with rain? The ground of
this desert is made of clay. It¡¯s a desert, so it¡¯s dry. But when there is the
occasional rain, the clay ground becomes extremely slippery. It¡¯s hard for
anyone to stand on, walk on. Some scientists theorized that perhaps when the
ground is slippery the high winds can then move the rocks. There¡¯s a problem 
with this theory. One team of scientists flooded an area of the desert with water,
then try to establish how much wind force would be necessary to move the
rocks. And guess this, you need winds of at least five hundred miles an hour to
move just the smallest rocks. And winds that strong have never been recorded.
Ever! Not on this planet.
So I think it¡¯s safe to say that that issues has been settled. Here is another
possibility ¨C ice. It¡¯s possible that rain on the desert floor could turn to thin
sheets of ice when temperatures drop at night. So if rocks¡­uh becoming
better than ice, uh ¡­ OK, could a piece of ice with rocks in it be pushed around
by the wind? But there¡¯s a problem with this theory, too. Rocks trapped in ice
together would have moved together when the ice moved. But that doesn¡¯t
always happen. The rocks seem to take separate routes.
There are a few other theories. Maybe the ground vibrates, or maybe the
ground itself is shifting, tilting. Maybe the rocks are moved by a magnetic force.
But sadly all these ideas have been eliminated as possibilities. There¡¯s just no
evidence. I bet you are saying to yourself well, why don¡¯t scientists just set up
video cameras to record what actually happens? Thing is this is a protective
wilderness area. So by law that type of research isn¡¯t allowed. Besides, in
powerful windstorms, sensitive camera equipment would be destroyed. So
why can¡¯t researchers just live there for a while until they observe the rocks¡¯
moving? Same reason.
So where are we now? Well, right now we still don¡¯t have any answers. So all
this leads back to my main point ¨C you need to know about more than just
rocks as geologists. The researchers studying moving rocks, well, they
combine their knowledge of rocks with knowledge of wind, ice and such¡­um
not successfully, not yet. But you know, they would even have been able to get
started without uh¡­ earth science understanding ¨C knowledge about wind,
storms, you know, meteorology. You need to understand physics. So for
several weeks like I said we¡¯ll be addressing geology from a wider prospective.
I guess that¡¯s all for today. See you next time.
